Let's begin once again with the left foot.
Here to set up our foot roll rig.
As I mentioned what this is for is to allow us to roll the foot back pivoting at the heel and then roll
it forward so it bends at the ball of the foot.
Now we're gonna have to add several new bones to this and these won't be directly deforming the character
but they will be moving these bones here in such a way that will give us that foot roll functionality.
So to begin with let's go back over into edit mode here and let's choose this joint right there actually
I want to tumble around and choose it right here just to make sure we have it.
I'll also turn on my move gizmo just so I can make sure and see where that selection is.
It just helps me see what I'm doing here.
Now I want to create a bone right here so let's snap that cursor with shift s to the selected right
here and then let's once again press shift a and then we have our new bone.
I'm going to zoom out a bit.
Grab this and drag it down so it's quite a bit smaller here and then what I want to do is I want to
move this down so it's horizontal here pointing out this way.
So to do that I'm going to hit the G key and then I'm going to hold the control key down and move it.
And as I do you can see it kind of snaps here and it's snapping a little bit above horizontal and below
horizontal.
So what I'll also do is hold that shift key down and it'll snap in smaller increments.
So I think I kind of like it right about right about here.
Let's go with that because I'm going to want another bone about this size back here as well.
And to do that I just need to move the cursor again shift s cursor to selected.
Let's create another bone shift a and then we'll bring this down as well I mean grab that tip and just
bring it down like this and then I want to do a similar thing I'm going to hit G and control and bring
this down to about right here.
But then once again I'll hold that shift key as well and snap it in smaller increments so maybe right
about there.
So this is kind of where we're going to roll that heel back right here.
At that point now that I've got this I want to select this bone and I want to spin it around because
I need this tip and this tip to be connected to each other or at least in the exact same spot.
So to do that I'm going to hit the R key and then once again press the control key and as I spin this
around you can see up in the top left hand corner.
I've got 180 degrees right here and then I'll click there.
So just holding that control key once again allowed me to rotate that in five degree increments.
Now there are two more bones we need to create right here at this ankle bone I'm going to tumble around
and make sure I have the left ones selected not the right one over here.
OK now let's move the cursor to this shift s cursor to selected and then we'll create a bone here shift
a and I'm going to bring this down like this and for this one we wanted to come out horizontally out
the back of the heel or the back of the leg.
So once again G hold the control key and bring it down over here and then shift in control and just
bring it right up here.
So it's just about horizontal maybe kind of like that.
All right.
Now we only need one more coming from the same location here.
So let's press shift a and bring this one down straight down in the z to here and then what I want to
do is once again hold that control key I'll press G hold control and bring that all the way down like
this and it looks like that's pretty good.
That's pretty much straight up and down.
That's good.
So I click there and there we go.
So those are the four bones we need to control the role of the foot but they're just named bone bones
0 0 1 0 0 2 et cetera.
So we need to change that.
That isn't going to help us any.
Let's go to the bone panel here.
Select this bone and let's begin changing the name.
So for this one this one is gonna help with the role of the toe so let's call this toe roll.
Dot L and this one is gonna help us with the heel.
So let's call this one heel roll dot l.
This one is gonna help us with controlling the role of the foot forward and back.
So let's call this foot roll dot pal and this one here the last one we created is gonna be the control
for the entire foot.
So we'll be able to grab this one and move the whole foot around and rotated as well.
So for this one Let's call this one foot control dot l we go.
So we've got TOE ROLL.
Heel roll foot roll and foot control now one thing I need to check is the heel roll bone here.
I need to check the role of this bone to make sure that when we're rotating this up we're doing so in
the positive x So recall that here in the sidebar we have this role field here and we can spin that
around if we need to but we need to first test it in post mode.
So let's come over here to pose Mon and let's switch to the rotation gizmo let's change from local to
normal.
And now let's take this and roll it up and if we look over here in the X we see that it's a negative
value so that's rolling or that's turning in the wrong direction.
We need to fix that.
I want to press old R to clear the rotation and let's come over here to edit mode again and let's use
the roll field once again.
We can just click and drag in that and spin that around and I want it to come over to 180 degrees.
There we go.
So now let's go back to pose mode and test it again.
So let's go to post mode here.
Now let's click and drag it again.
If we rotate it up we see that we're turning in the positive x.
That's good.
That's what we want and we'll go down that into the negative.
All right.
That's the way we need it for this particular setup so I'll press old are to clear that and let's go
back to edit mode now let's now quickly take these and mirror them over to the other side.
So if we take the TOE ROLL he'll roll foot roll and put control.
Right here we go.
And then if we move the cursor back to the center of the grid shift s cursor to world origin also we
need to change our transform orientations to global.
And we need to change our pivot point to 3d cursor.
Now in the same way that we mirrored the leg and the arm over we can do that here.
So if we press shift D and enter and then control M and X and then enter we can move those over to the
other side.
Now once again we can right click names flip names and we still got to go in and take away the 0 0 1
manually.
All right.
We can do that.
So I'll go ahead and finish that up.
But in the next video what let's do is begin parenting these new bones in such a way that they control
the rotation of the foot.
That's coming up next.